#DELIMITER#
13 10 2014, India
Sansad Adarsh Gram Yojana
All the governments that have come to power in India since Independence have been working for rural development in their own ways. These efforts should continue relentlessly while adapting with time. Plans should be made according to changing times and the speed of change should gain pace in accordance with the pace of the world. This is an ever-continuing process. However it is important to introduce some new elements each time to speed up and enliven this process. 
Every State of India has at least 5 to 10 villages that it can be proud of. There is a different feeling when we enter such villages. If government planning creates these villages, then there should have been more of such villages. Since there are only a few, it means there is something extra, apart from government plans. This something extra is the soul of Saansad Adarsh Gram Yojana. 
Plans exist for all villages, but some villages progressed as there were some people in those villages with a different thought process. Some leaders who led differently to bring about these changes. It is not that there are no other better villages. There are. And they have been built by our people only. Need of the hour is to bring some changes in the decision making process and the beginning has to be made somewhere. 
Today is the birth anniversary of Jayaprakash Narayan Ji, a vibrant young force of freedom struggle. The way he led his life after independence keeping away from politics and dedicating himself to creative work alone, is a source of inspiration for all of us. There was always a shadow of Gandhiji and Vinobaji on his thoughts. Lohiaji was also an influence. He said that Gram Dharma is an important thing and till the time our villages don’t think or move as a society, Gram Dharma is not possible. And if Gram Dharma is possible then the village can choose its path to new heights. 
The Village was always present in Mahatma Gandhi’s life. Gandhi ji returned from abroad in 1915. Within two years he implemented what he had learnt in Champaran, Bihar, where he fought for the rights of people. It was done with people’s participation. The seeds of freedom struggle were sowed by Gandhi ji in villages only. Today is also the birth anniversary of Shri NanaJi Deshmukh - a close comrade of Jai Prakash Narayan ji. 
Nanaji dedicated himself to the development of JaiPrabha Nagar near Chitrakoot, which was named after Jai Prakash Narayan and his wife Prabha Devi. Based on the model of JaiPrabha Nagar, he worked to make rural life self-sufficient in many villages of Uttar Pradesh. 
Our former President Abdul Kalam ji visited these villages and mentioned them in many of his speeches. The point is, today we have to take the Adarsh Gram Yojana forward with our MPs’ guidance, MPs’ leadership and MPs’ efforts. For the time being, we have thought of a total of three villages in this term. One model village should be achieved by 2016 and based on that experience, two more model villages are to be achieved by 2019. Later, every year, one village can be done by a MP. We are almost 800 MPs and if we do three villages before 2019 then 2,500 villages will be covered. 
If the States also make schemes for their MLAs based on this scheme, then six-seven thousand more villages can be added. If a village in a block improves then it doesn’t stop there. It is adopted by nearby villages also. They also discuss what is being done and how it can be replicated. This can initiate a viral effect. That is why it is important how we lay its foundation. 
For a long time this debate has been going on in the country about whether development model should be top-to-bottom or bottom-to-top. Let the discussion go on. Academic discussions have their own importance. But the responsibility of doers is to do. We need to start somewhere. So let us sit at the bottom and look at one village in our constituency at least. 
Many people don’t understand the biggest benefit from this. Today an MP is engaged in tackling problems of the public in his constituency. Irrespective of the party, the MP is accountable and has to perform. However most of his or her time and energy is spent in immediate problems. Secondly, his/her energy and time is spent in getting work done from the government and officers. I can’t say whether I will be able to change this. What happens to MPLADS funds? Constituency people demand this or that. Then it is distributed, given to government officers with an instruction that it should please most of the village. Only small schemes are undertaken ultimately. 
This is the kind of work which, with focused activities, can make the MP feel that his / her name will be associated with the village for years to come. The village always remember that earlier the village was like this, and one MP came and changed all that. 
Today, there are many government schemes. An MP might be coming in touch with these schemes only in parts. What is the problem in uniting the streams of these different schemes? What are the shortcomings and what are the ways to improve? Once an MP starts discussing this in the village, many deficiencies of government system will be revealed. 
It is not a small risk that I have taken here. However, on the basis of my knowledge and experience, I can say that once an MP is associated with this, many problems will come to the fore. This will lead to a change in system. Then everybody will think that if we have changed one village, then we can do the same elsewhere also. What happens now a days? A scheme comes to a village. A water tank is dug at one place, tube-well at other place. If there is tube-well, there is no water tank and vice-versa. Expenditure is done but without outcome. That is why the MP is going to be involved in every activity of village life to bring the focus on the outcome. 
There is a flexibility in this programme to choose any village. If possible it should have a population of 3,000-5,000. This does not mean that smaller or bigger habitations are not be touched. This is flexible. But if approximately 3,000 to 5,000 population is there, then a system can be worked out. In hilly and tribal areas where such big villages are not there, the number should be between 1,000 to 3,000. 
Only one condition has been imposed by me. And that is that the MPs must not pick their own village, or village of their in-laws. Apart from this, choose any village. Even I have to select a village in Varanasi. A guideline has been brought out today. I will also go to Varanasi and talk to the people there, and after consultation, will select the village. 
One of the biggest problems for us has been that our development model has been supply-driven. A scheme has been prepared in Lucknow, Gandhi Nagar, or Delhi. The same is attempted to be injected. We want to shift this model from supply-driven to demand driven through Aadrash Gram. There should be an urge developed in the village itself. The villagers should themselves come out and tell us what they need. This scheme is not just to construct a bridge or a pond. 
Can a change be brought about in our today’s conditions or not? Someone please tell me that if there is a school, Panchayat Ghar, Temple, or a place of worship in the village, should not that be clean? Do we need a budget to tell us this? 
I have been lucky, not many people in political life may have been so lucky. I have travelled for 45 years. Must have stayed overnight in more than 400 districts of India. There must have been at least 5,000 villages outside Gujarat that I visited. Therefore, I understand these things from experience. We should create a confidence in the villages and make them committed to this. 
Please tell me, in a village of 3,000 to 5,000, how many deliveries take place in a year? Maximum 100. Out of these 50-60 women will be economically sound. 25-30 women will be such who will need the village’s support for nutrition. If this happens, the chances of malnutrition in the child and maternal mortality will be reduced drastically. 
If this was to be done by Government of India, then a Cabinet note would have been prepared, department’s comments would have been taken, tender would have been floated. And everyone knows what happens after the tender is floated. Then six months later, some breaking news would have come in newspapers. In this, no tender, budget, Cabinet or Minister is needed. People of the village will collectively decide that if 25 women are expecting and they are poor, then the village will take care of the extra nutritional food for three-four months. 
I say, friends, this is easy. All we need is to change our mind set. We need to unite people’s hearts. Normally MPs are engaged in political activities, but after this, when they will come to the village, there will be no political activities. It will be like family. Decisions will be taken sitting with the people of the villages. It will re-energise and unite the village. Problems will be solved. 
Currently, there is a mid-day meal scheme run by the government. It is a good thing, should be there. Often there are 80-100 families in the village who celebrate occasions like birthdays, death anniversaries of family elders etc. They should be contacted and be told that when such celebratory occasions come, they should come go to the school with family. They should bring some sweets to the school and sit with the students for the mid-day meal and share with them. This will lead to a good movement of social harmony. At the same time, this can also work as input to improve the quality of the mid-day meal. This doesn’t require any big scheme we can take this forward, can’t we? 
Government is planning to establish Gobar Gas Plants in villages. As you know some one or two persons avail it due to their capacity to get government money. But cow dung is not available. Then, in one or two years, the plant becomes a monument. How many monuments will you keep building? Now imagine, that there is a “Gobar Bank” of the village. The entire cow dung in the village can be deposited in such a bank and a common gas plant is built with this. Gas is supplied to the entire village. Our mothers and sisters suffer a lot due to smoke from the chulhas. I am seeing an opportunity which doesn’t involve expenditure. Those who would deposit the gobar will get the same amount during the agriculture season as fertilizer. This will also bring cleanliness in the village along with fertilizer and gas. Improvement in health parameters due to clean village will be an extra benefit. I say that we should take interest in creating such an atmosphere in the village. 
Sometimes I think, are we able to create an atmosphere where people can be proud of village? Unless we create such an atmosphere, change will not come. This is very important. Every village has its birthday, why should it not be celebrated like a festival when everybody will come together they will think about what can be done for the village? I think government schemes were always the foundation of Adarsh Gram Yojana. There is no change in that. But this is an experiment to fill the gaps. If I think that it is the ultimate solution, I will be disbelieving in the thinking power of humanity. No thinking is complete, every thinking moves towards completeness. Therefore I believe nothing is ultimate. Whatever has happened is good. Whatever is happening today is step forward. It will not work if we consider it a full stop. The point is that as per requirement, the government should have flexibility. It should not work by diktat, but it should facilitate. I say this with full faith that any MP will develop his or her village as a place of pilgrimage after 2016. He/She will tell his/her relatives that I have built a village, let’s go and see that. This is the satisfaction level that leads to solutions in the life of a person. 
Jai Prakash Narayan ji had said an important thing which, I believe, is inspiring even in these times. He said that democracy and politics cannot be separated. Politics is democracy’s second nature. This is important. We are fed up of dirty politics. Dirty politics gives a bad name to the entire political field. This or that party is not the issue. An atmosphere of trust has suffered. Jai Prakash Narayan ji said something very good. He said that freedom from politics is not the way. We should see how fast liberal and good politics takes the place of dirty politics. I believe that “Sansad Aadarsh Gram Yojna” is opening a new door of creative politics. 
Will I get votes in the village? Are the communities in the village my supporters? Am I on good terms with the local leaders in the village? We need to rise above all this and leave it all outside the village boundaries when we do this work. Here, the village is a community, a cohesive society. Can I be a facilitator or a catalytic agent to fulfil their dreams? Can I work as a friend with a feeling of oneness? 
When in 2016 this will be discussed in the Parliament, MPs will speak in the Parliament on the basis of the experience. Howsoever insensitive the government may be, it will have to acknowledge the experience of the Parliamentarian. Howsoever strong might be the majority of the government, it will have to change its policies. Weight of the Parliamentarian is going to increase. No government will be able to deny this because the MP will say that I went to the village, I am working, these are the problems in my village, the policies of your government are wrong, your schemes are incorrect and your officers don’t understand. The power of these words will become the reason for change in the government’s policies. This country is going to choose bottom-to-top approach. In the academic word bottom-to-top, top-to-bottom approaches are discussed. But we want to make a beginning somewhere. For this I say demand-driven and not supply-driven. Can we choose a society-driven development approach rather than a government-driven one? Can we increase people’s participants along with government facilitation? 
We were just watching a video about a village in Andhra. They have set up 28 committees in such a small village. All are functional, there are not for show. And they have done it. If we take this inspiration, if today Parliamentarians and tomorrow MLAs will take forward 7-8 thousands villages every year, it will create a viral effect that will change the entire model of development of rural clusters. 
We should understand that the aspirations of a rural person are no less than an urban person. He is also watching the world and wants a change in his quality of life. He also wants good education for his children. If long distance education is available, he wants it. 
Let’s talk about drip irrigation. Who can deny that there is a water crisis everywhere? Won’t I place drip irrigation in every field of my chosen village? I’ll bring all the schemes of the government, will help them in getting loans from banks. Can I increase their production through drip irrigation? Economy of the village will change. There will be cattle rearing and increased milk production, improved situation of cattle. I will bring officers, explain things to them and bring change. 
Friends, I believe that rural life can be changed. Those MPs who have been elected from urban areas and don’t have any village, I request them to choose a nearby village. My friends from Rajya Sabha should select a village of their choice from the states from which they are coming. Nominated MPs can choose any village from all over India. We will all collectively try to open the door of creative politics and will work away from political untouchability. 
Jai Prakash Ji, Mahatama Gandhi, Ram Manohar Lohia ji, Pandit Deen Dayal Ji, are such icons of last century whose shadow is there on the political life of today. All may not have impacted all but everyone must have been influenced a little by someone. We should take inspiration from them and move this work ahead. This is my expectation from you. 
I said on 15th August that on 11th October, on the birth anniversary of Jai Prakash ji, we will present the guidelines. Some of my friends informed me of their selection of village that evening itself. And they were not BJP MPs alone. Even MPs from other parties, for example even Congress MPs, wrote to me. That day itself I felt that this concept has value. That is why people are adopting it beyond party politics. 
Still there are many like me, who have to select the village. It is pending in my area also because I wanted to decide after the guidelines are prepared and in consultation with the people and officers of Varanasi. I will surely do this in the next 15-20 days. We should convey this confidence that there will be more villages in the future. A model is emerging. If we manage to show this model to villagers, change will be automatic. We will bring about rural development by our efforts and not by diktat. The letter has been written and the job is done - this is not like that. This will not be accomplished by asking questions in the Parliament. We need to work collectively. 
I believe that we are experimenting with a new way of serving Mother India in a big way. I complement all the Parliamentarians from the deepest core of my heart that all party members have accepted this, welcomed this. This is not a final scheme, there will be many changes, many reforms, many practical situations will emerge. This is not a money-related scheme. This scheme is people-driven and will be accomplished through people’s participation and Parliamentarians’ guidance. We should take this forward. With this hope, I thank you all. 
Once again I pay my tributes to Jai Prakash ji. 
#DELIMITER#
3 10 2014, India
Mann ki Baat
My Dear Countrymen, 
Today is the holy festival of Vijay Dashami. My heartiest greetings on this occasion of Vijay Dashami to one and all. 
Through the medium of radio, I would like to share few heartfelt thoughts with you today. And, I hope that not only today, this series of conversation may be carried out regularly in future. I will try my best, if possible, to take out time twice a month or even once to speak with you. In future, I have also decided that whenever I will speak to you, it would be on Sundays and time would be morning 11. In that way, it would be convenient for you too and I will feel contented with the fact that I am successful in sharing my thoughts with you. 
We are celebrating the festival of Vijay Dashami today, which symbolises the triumph of Good over Evil. But one gentleman named Ganesh Venkatadari, a native of Mumbai, sent me a mail and has written to me that we must take a vow to eliminate ten bad habits from within ourselves on this occasion of Vijay Dashami. I express my gratitude to him for this recommendation. We all, as individuals, must be thinking to put an end to all our bad habits and win over them, although, with respect to our nation, I believe we all should come together and take a vow in eliminating all the dirt from our country. On this occasion of Vijay Dashami, we must take a vow to eliminate dirt and filth and we can do so on this occasion. 
Yesterday, on 2nd October on the eve of Mahatma Gandhi’s birth anniversary, more than 1.25 crore countrymen have started the ‘Swachh Bharat’ movement. I had shared one thought yesterday which is that I will nominate nine people and they need to upload their videos of cleaning the nation on social media websites, and nominating nine more people to do the same. I want you all to join me, clean the nation, and nominate nine more people to clean the nation, and those nine people must do the same. Eventually, the entire nation will have this atmosphere. I strongly believe that you all will join hands with me to carry this movement forward. 
Whenever, we think of Mahatma Gandhi, naturally we are reminded of Khaadi. You may be wearing variety of clothes with different fabrics and company brands in your family. But is it not possible to include Khaadi too? I am not telling you to use only Khaadi products. I am just insisting to use, at least one Khaadi product, like handkerchief, or a bath towel, a bed sheet, a pillow cover, a curtain or anything of that kind. If you have an inclination for all kinds of fabrics and clothes in your family, you can also buy Khaadi products on a regular basis. I am saying this as when you buy Khaadi products, it helps poor people to light lamps on Diwali. Also, you can avail a special discount on Khaadi products from 2nd October for a month. It is a very small thing, but has very big impact which binds you with the poor. How you see this as a success. When I speak of 1.25 crore countrymen and infer the outcome, we might assume that government will take care of everything and as individuals we stand nowhere. We have seen that if we intend to progress then we need to identify our potential, understand our strengths and I can swear that we form the incomparable souls of this world. You all know that our own scientists have been successful in reaching Mars, bearing least expenses. We do not lack in our strengths, but have forgotten our strong points. We have forgotten ourselves. We have become hopeless. My dear Brothers and Sisters I cannot let this happen. I always remember one of the sayings by Swami Vivekananda ji as he always used to emphasize on one thought and possibly, he might have shared this thought with many others. 
Vivekananda ii used to say, once a lioness was carrying her two cubs on the way and came upon a flock of sheep from a distance. She got a desire to prey upon them and started running towards the flock. Seeing her running, one of the cub too, joined her. The other cub was left behind and the lioness moved on, post preying upon the flock. One of the cub went with the lioness but the other cub was left behind, and was brought up by a mother sheep. He grew among the sheep, started speaking their language and adapted their ways of life. He used to sit, laugh and enjoy with them. The cub who went with the lioness, was a grown-up now. Once, he happened to meet his brother and was shocked to see him. He thought in his mind,” He is a lion and is playing with sheep, talking like sheep. What is wrong with him? He felt that his ego was at stake and went to talk to his brother. He said,” What are you doing, brother? You are a lion.” He gets a reply from his brother, “No, I am a sheep. I grew up with them. They have brought me up. Listen to my voice and the way I talk.” He said, “Come, I will show you, who you really are.” He took his brother to a well and told him to look in the water his own reflection, and asked him, if both of them had similar faces. “I am a lion, you, too, are a lion.” His brother’s self-esteem got awakened; he attained self-realization through this and even a lion brought up among sheep started roaring like a lion. His inner entity was awakened. Swami Vivekananda ji used to say the same. My countrymen, 125 crore Indians have indefinite strengths and capabilities. We need to understand ourselves. We need to identify our inner strengths and like Swami ji always used to say, we need to carry our self-respect, identify ourselves and move forward in life and be successful, which in turn, make our nation a winning and successful country. I believe, all our countrymen with a population of 125 crores are efficient, strong and can stand against any odds with confidence.
These days, I have been getting many letters through social media websites, like Facebook, from my friends. One of them, Mr. Gautam Pal, has addressed an issue regarding the specially-abled children. He has suggested forming separate Municipality, Municipal Corporation or councils for them. We need to plan something for them for enhancing their moral support. I liked his suggestion and I have experienced this during my day as Chief Minister of Gujarat. A Special Olympics was held in Athens in 2011. After the Olympics I had called all the participants and winners of specially-abled category from Gujarat to my home. I spent two hours with them, and it was the most emotional and inspiring incident of my life. As I believe, a specially-abled child is not only the responsibility of the parents in a family, it is the responsibility of the entire society. God has chosen this family to support a specially-abled child, but a child is a responsibility of the entire nation. After this incident, I got so emotionally attached with them, I started organizing separate Olympics for them in Gujarat. Thousands of children with their parents used to come and attend, I, too, used to attend the Olympics. There was an atmosphere of trust and, this is the reason, I liked the suggestion given by Mr. Gautam Pal and I felt like sharing this thought with you. 
It reminds me of another story. Once, a traveller was sitting at the corner of a road, and was asking everyone the way to a specific place. He continued asking the route from many people. A man, sitting beside him was observing him. The traveller stood up and started asking passers-by again. He stood up and said,” The way to your destination is here.” The traveller, then, said,” Brother, you were sitting next to me for so long, saw me asking everyone the route. If you knew the route, why didn’t you tell me before?” The man answered,” I was waiting to verify if you really intend to reach your destination or you are asking people just for your knowledge. But, when you stood up, I was assured that you truly wish to reach your destination, and decided to confirm the address”.
My countrymen, till the time we do not decide to walk, stand on our own, we will also not the get the guidance from others in our journey. We will not get the people to hold our hand and help us in walking. We need to take the initiative in walking and I trust all my 125 crore Indians, who are capable of walking on their own and will keep moving. 
For the past few days, I have been getting very interesting suggestions from people. I am aware, when to adapt to these suggestions. But, I want everyone to actively participate in these suggestions as we all belong to our nation, the nation does not only belong to any Government. We are the citizens of our Nation and we all need to unite without any exceptions. Some of you have suggested simplifying the registration process for Small Scale Industries. I will definitely put this under Government’s notice. Some of you have written to me to incorporate skills development courses in the school curriculum from 5th standard. This will help the students to learn various skills and crafts. I loved this effective suggestion given by them. They have also suggested that even the adults should learn skills development courses along with their studies. One of the suggestions given was to keep a dustbin at every 100 meters and a cleaning system should be established. 
Some of you have written to me, to abolish the use of plastic bags. I am receiving numerous suggestions from people. I have always been telling you, to write to me and narrate a true incident, which is positive and inspiring to me and our Countrymen, along with the evidence. If you do this, I can promise this to you, that I will share all those heartfelt thoughts or suggestions with all our Countrymen, through “Mann ki Baat”. 
I have only one intention in speaking with you all,” Come, let us serve our Mother India. Let us all take our nation to the new heights. Let us all take a step forward. If you take one step, our nation takes 125 crore steps to move forward, and for this purpose, on this auspicious occasion of Vijay Dashami, we all need to defeat all of our inner evils and decide to start doing something good for the nation. Today is the fortunate beginning for me. I will be sharing my heartfelt thoughts with one and all. Today, I have shared all the thoughts coming directly from my heart. I will meet you all next at 11 am on Sundays, but I trust our journey shall never end and will continue receiving love and suggestions from you. 
After listening to my thoughts, please do not hesitate in sharing your thoughts or advice to me, I will appreciate that your suggestions keep coming. I am glad to talk with you through this simple medium of Radio, which serves each and every corner of the nation. I can reach the poorest homes, as mine, my nation’s strength lies within the hut of Poor, within the villages; my nation’s strength lies with the Mothers, Sisters and Youths; my nation’s strength lies with the farmers. Nation will only progress, if you believe in it. I am expressing my trust towards the nation. I believe in your strength, hence, I believe in our nation’s future. 
I would once again, like to thank one and all for taking out time and listening to me. Thank you all. 
#DELIMITER#
2 10 2014, India
Launch of Swachhata mission
Following is the English rendering of the text of Prime Minister, Shri Narendra Modi at the launch of Swachhata Mission, here today.
“Bharat Mata ki Jai, Long Live Mahatma Gandhi, Long Live Lal Bahadur Shastri.
My Colleagues from Central Government, Shri Venkaiah Naidu ji and Shri Nitin Gadkari ji, dignitaries and my young friends.
Today is 2nd October, birth anniversaries of our Pujya Mahatma Gandhi and Lal Bahadur Shashtri ji. Lal Bahadur Shastri gave us the Mantra of Jai Jawan Jai Kisan. Indian Farmers filled the granaries in reply to that exhortation. Pujya Bapu gave us the message of ‘Quit India- Clean India’. Our countrymen, under the leadership of Mahatma Gandhi, freed the nation from colonialism. Bapu’s dream of cleanliness, however, remains unfulfilled.
Here, we had called for a logo and an idea through crowd-sourcing, asked the people for a tagline. Bhai Anant of Maharashtra and sister Bhagyashri won the contest. It was right to the point. I can see, that through these glasses Gandhiji is looking and asking whether we have cleaned India or not. This is not just a logo. Through these glasses he is looking, asking- what have you done? What will you do and how? By when will you do it? This is the message of the logo that has Mahatma Gandhi’s glasses. They give us the message of Clean India. I compliment the creator of this logo- Shri Anant. One tag line has been given by Bhagyashri- ‘one step towards cleanliness’. Not a big deal, just a step. For this I complement Bhagyashri.
My dear countrymen,
Today from this platform with all the authenticity, and purity at my command, India Gate is right in front of me where flame of our martyrs is burning, I swear by that, I am not making a political statement. All Governments of this country must have done their bit for this cause. Many social, cultural and religious leaders must have contributed towards this task. There may have been different people, different forms of programme, I salute all of them. I have to take this series forward. I don’t make any claim that the new Government is doing everything. I acknowledged all previous Governments from the Red Fort also. Today, from this august platform I convey my respect to all Governments whether of Centre or of State, municipal bodies, social organizations, Sarvodaya leaders, Seva Dal workers. As this holy mission is starting today, I salute every one of them and pray to all countrymen to start this programme.
Sometimes I feel that the job of getting rid of filth belongs to Safai karmchari only? Isn’t it the duty of all the 125 crore countrymen? Will we keep on imposing everything on them only? Something good happens or bad, will be keep on blaming them only? We have to change this situation. Like all 125 crore Indians the Prime Minister is also first son of Bharat Mata and Prime Minister later. Therefore, as the children of this mother, all of us are responsible that we should not keep our country like this. It may be village neighborhood, home family, school and college, Mandir, Masjid or Gurudwara; how can we keep it dirty? Wherever we see filth or see someone throwing papers why don’t we feel like picking that up? I know this will not be accomplished only by publicity campaign. Old habits take time to change. It’s a difficult task, I know. But we have till 2019 when we will observe 150th anniversary of Mahatma Gandhi.
I am grateful to my media friends who are spreading this message. If we collectively make it a people’s movement then I don’t see any reason why we will not be counted among the clean cities and nations of the world. India can also do it, Indians can do it. If Indians can reach Mars with minimum expense then can’t they clean their neighborhood? No Prime Minister or Minister took us to Mars. It was done by the scientists; children of Mother India. Cleanliness will also be achieved together.
I know, in coming days I will be criticized. Look what has been achieved? I understand lot of criticism will come my way. However, I am ready to face all the criticism for making Mother India pristine once again. I have come with the determination that 125 crore Indians will not let Mother India remain dirty. We will not leave any stone unturned to fulfill Bapu’s dreams.
I have decided to start a movement in social media also. It is there on MyGov.in website also. A new website has been created on ‘Clean India’. Work has been started on Facebook and Twitter also. #MycleanIndia was started today. I appeal all the countrymen to upload photographs of garbage, then clean that and upload the video and the photographs of the cleaned place. I also appeal to media. There are many youngsters, organizations in every nook and corner of the country. They are doing the work of cleanliness way before I became the Prime Minister. They should be brought to the limelight by Media. All common people who work for cleanliness should be highlighted. All of us should create an inspiring environment. Finger pointing will not help as I told earlier this is beyond politics. This is a work solely inspired by patriotism. We will do it with patriotic feeling. There is no place for politics. That is why I say there are many organizations and social and cultural bodies those who are working in their own way. I have seen many villages where Sarpanch is so alert and villagers keep the village in exemplary cleanliness. Many people are like that. Some of the teachers take lot of interest in keeping the premises clean, the atmosphere is kept very pure.
When we come to India Gate and go towards Rashtrapati Bhawan it feels nice to see the clean surroundings. Should not every corner of India be this clean? Isn’t this our social duty? We will do a great disservice by treating it politically or considering it a photo opportunity. Mahatma Gandhi did not go to every locality to clean up but his commitment created awareness towards cleanliness in entire India. We also have to do it together. Wherever we are, we should do it. I believe we will be able to clean our Mother India. This is a work for 125 crore Indians. In those 125 crore Indians there is a person called Modi. Not that Modi is alone but there are 125 crore Indians and I am saying it 125 crore times. This work is not only for Government or for Ministers, neither is this work only of social organizations and devoted social workers. This is a mass movement. The more we associate this with common person, the more are the chances of success.
Today Navarati is coming to an end. Tomorrow we will celebrate Vijayadashmi. I convey my best wishes to all countrymen for Vijayadashmi tomorrow.
Today, I have started a programme on social media. I have invited 9 people to come to public place and work for cleanliness. I am sure that those 9 people whom I have invited will surely do this work. Not only this, I have requested them that they should also invite 9 other people. Then 9 more. I request you also that you also upload videos of your cleanliness projects and this chain of 9 should carry on. Today, I have invited Goa Governor Hon’ble Mridula Sinha, Bharat Ratna Sachin Tendulkar, Yoga Guru Baba Ramdev, Congress leader Shri Shashi Tharoor jee, Shriman Kamal Hasan, Shriman Salman Khan, sister Priyanka Chopra and the entire team of Tarak Mehta ka Ulta Chashma. I have told them to push this through their and other serials. Our film industry will also see, in last fifty years there have been many movies where they were episodes related to cleanliness. We need to encourage this and do our duty.
Brothers and sisters there is a startling evaluation of WHO – they say that the diseases created by lack of cleanliness results in additional loss of 6500 rupees to every Indian. Due to illness someone is not able to drive taxi or auto rickshaw or not able to distribute newspapers or not able to deliver milk. This is just the average of the total loss. If we take out affluent households then burden on poor people will go up to 12-15 thousand. If we just spread cleanliness, our poor will be saved 6500 rupees. This will save him from diseases and unemployment. This movement is very important for the health of the poor. Serving Mother India is serving the poorest.
Come let’s see on MyGov.in, my Facebook or twitter, the mood that I am witnessing, the enthusiasm that I see, fills me with hope that public is ready to move hundred steps ahead of the Government. If public is moving there is no reason to stop them.
Brothers and sisters, We should gift something to Mahatma Gandhi. In 2019 when Gandhiji will turn 150, we should gift him a Swachh Bharat created with a collective responsibility. Quit India was successful due to the involvement of everyone in the freedom struggle. Success of clean India lies in the involvement of 125 crore Indians. Jai Jawan, Jai Kisan was successful as it was given by Lal Bahadur Shastri. He called for agricultural production. Nobody asked Lal Bahadur Shastri that, are you going to the fields to plough them, have you done some farming or produced some foodgrain? Nobody asked anything. But as Lal Bahadur Shastri said Jai Kisan- all the farmers stood up and filled the granaries. The momentous tasks of giving food to every poor in India was done on the words of this great man. Now, this is the time to realise Mahatma Gandhi’s words. Just look at the purity of this great man’s words, its power, its dedication: Shouldn’t this inspire us? Whether it is me or you, success of clean India will give us the same pleasure as the success of Quit India slogan. It will give us similar joy and prosperity. We have started moving ahead with our faith in the words of these great men.
Don’t put your trust on me or my Government, trust Mahatma Gandhi. Trust his sacrifice, determination and dedication. Believe in his dream of Swachh Bharat. Today this is our responsibility that if we are the children of Mother India we should not either cause filth or allow other to do it. Often when we go to foreign countries, we say how clean it was there, there was no dirt anywhere. Then I ask these people, did you like the fact that it was so clean? Then I ask, did you see anyone littering or spitting? They say, no we didn’t. Then I say that the secret of cleanliness is in the discipline of their citizens. If we manage that, I am sure we will do wonders. One more work is there – that of building toilets. In our villages more than sixty percent people are still going to toilet in open. I feel most pained that even our mothers and sisters have to go in open. We have to remove this blot. I have told corporate social responsibility people to prioritize this. We should do this much at least for the dignity of our mothers and sisters.
Even today, there are many schools which don’t have separate toilets for girls. We need to change this. It is nobody’s fault; we just need to move ahead with a positive outlook of future. There should not be any political comment by any member of this movement as everybody has work. Every one before us also worked. Under Mahatma Gandhi, Congress was at the forefront of it.
I worship this work, that is why I request specially to media and countrymen with folded hands that, associate this movement only with love for the country. Link this movement only with the worship of Mother India and with the poor and health of the poor. We should not vitiate the environment by talking about, who is doing who is not, who was successful, who was not. We should move with a sense of collective responsibility. With collective responsibility we will surely be successful.
Now I invite every one of you. We are going to take an oath here. My request is that those who are sitting should take oath sitting, no need to stand up. Those who are standing should keep on standing. My second request is that you should raise both of your hands and remember Mahatma Gandhi. Feel that this work is for building a Bharat of the dreams of Pujya Bapu. We should not just utter the words but take solemn pledge. You will take the pledge, take the movement forward and will leave no stone unturned.
Mahatma Gandhi dreamt of an India which was not only free but also clean and developed. Mahatma Gandhi secured freedom for Mother India. Now it is our duty to serve Mother India by keeping the country neat and clean.
I take this pledge that I will remain committed towards cleanliness and devote time for this. I will devote 100 hours per year that is two hours per week to voluntary work for cleanliness. I will neither litter nor let others litter. I will initiate the quest for cleanliness with myself, my family, my locality, my village and my work place.
I believe that the countries of the world that appear clean are so because their citizens don’t indulge in littering nor do they allow it to happen.
With this firms belief, I will propagate the message of Swachh Bharat Mission in villages and towns.
I will encourage 100 other persons to take this pledge which I am taking today.
I will endeavour to make them devote their 100 hours for cleanliness.
I am confident that every step I take towards cleanliness will help in making my country clean.
Jai Hind!
Long live Mahatma Gandhi
Long live Mahatma Gandhi
Long live Mahatma Gandhi
Best wishes to all!
#DELIMITER#
30 9 2014, USA
Joint Press Statement with President of USA 
Mr. President, members of the media,
First, I want to thank President Obama for his invitation and his warm and generous hospitality.
I am pleased to visit USA and meet President Obama at the start of my tenure.
I am happy that we are meeting here just a few days after the Indian and the U.S. missions reached Mars around the same time. So, after the India-U.S. summit on Mars, we are meeting here on earth. This happy co-incidence captures the potential of our relationship.
This visit, especially my conversation with President Obama, has reinforced my conviction that India and the United States are natural global partners, based on our shared values, interests and strengths in the digital age. We already have the foundation of a strong partnership. We now have to revive the momentum and ensure that we get the best out of it for our people and for the world.
President and I spoke about many of our common economic priorities. I am confident that India will see rapid economic growth and transformation. We are focusing in India on not just on policies, but also on processes, to make it easy and productive to do business in India. I believe that India-U.S. economic partnership will also grow rapidly in the coming years.
I also sought President Obama`s support for continued openness and ease of access for Indian services companies in the U.S. market.
We are serious about resolution of issues on both sides to enable civil nuclear energy cooperation to take off. It is important for India`s energy security.
We had a candid discussion on Bali Ministerial of the WTO. India supports trade facilitation. However, I also expect that we are able to find a solution that takes care of our concern on food security. I believe that it should be possible to do that soon.
We have agreed to consult and cooperate closely on climate change issues, an area of strong priority for both of us.
There was great convergence on international developments that matter the most to our two countries, including peace and stability in Asia Pacific region. The United States is intrinsic to our Look East and Link West policies.
We discussed existing terrorism challenges, including in South Asia, and the new threats of terrorism in West Asia and beyond. We agreed to intensify our counter-terrorism and intelligence cooperation.
The Afghan people have shown the will to prevail over violence and extremism. We discussed our two countries` continued commitment to assist Afghanistan and our own coordination in this area.
We have shared concern on the Ebola crisis in Africa, for which India has already made financial commitments of 12 million U.S. dollars.
Given our broad range of shared interests, we will also continue to deepen our security dialogue and defence relations. I want to especially welcome the U.S. defence companies to participate in developing the Indian defence industry.
During the last four days in the U.S., I have seen extraordinary interest and excitement about India and India-U.S. partnership among the people of our two countries.
We will draw strength and inspiration from it as we start a more purposeful course in our ongoing journey. I look forward to receiving President Obama and his family in India at a convenient time.
I once again thank President Obama, the people of the United States and, especially, the Indian American community for their warm welcome and hospitality.
#DELIMITER#
27 9 2014, USA
Global Citizen's Festival, New York
How are you doing, New York...
I hope, you are having, a good time...
Namaste. My greetings, to all those, watching on TVs, laptops, tablets and phones, as well. 
This, is a great city. It has assimilated, the world, in itself. 
Today, you have shown, that you also care, for the world outside. 
I am truly delighted, to be here. In the open Central Park. And not inside, a closed Conference Room... 
Among the Youth. Among you. 
Because, you are the future. What you do Today, will decide, our Tomorrow. 
I feel, a current of hope, in this Park. Among you, I feel confident about the future...
You are touching, the lives of those, who are not as fortunate, as you are. What an admirable act, this is. What a sacred mission.
For you to think, about those, who are far. Whose faces, you have not seen. Whose names, you do not know. Whose nationality, does not matter to you.

For you to convert, your thoughts into action. And devote, your time, and energy. So that others, may have a better future too.
Those living in poverty. Without education. Without basic sanitation. Without opportunity. And worse, without hope.
I salute you. I feel proud, of each one of you. I am sure, your families, your friends, your nation, feels just as proud.
Some believe, that the world changes, with the wisdom of the old.
I think, that the idealism, innovation, energy and ‘can do’ attitude, of the youth, is even more powerful.
That is my hope, for India too. 800 million youth, joining hands, to transform our nation. 
To put, the light of hope, in every eye. And, the joy of belief, in every heart. Lift people, out of poverty. Put clean water, and sanitation, within the reach of all. Make healthcare, available to all. A roof, over every head. 

I know, it is possible...
Because, I feel, a new sense of purpose, energy, and will, in India. 
Because, India’s youth, can see that, you are joining hands, with them.
Because, I believe, that we can speak with one voice. For one future...
That, is why, I am here.
Because, I believe in you...
Let me end, with a few lines in Sanskrit, that inspire me, personally:
May All, be prosperous, and happy.
May All, be free from illness.
May All, see what is spiritually uplifting. 
May no one, suffer.
Om Peace, Peace, Peace...
Thank you once again, for having me over.
Thanks in particular, to Hugh Jackman here.
God bless you all. 
May the Force be with You...
Thank you.
Join me in saying, Bharat Mata Ki Jai!Bharat Mata Ki Jai!Bharat Mata Ki Jai!